talk.md, before:

class: middle, center, title-slide
count: false

# Likelihood Publication and Preservation

<br>

.huge.blue[Matthew Feickert]<br>
.huge[(University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign)]
.center.width-30[[![illinois_logo](assets/logos/logo_institution.png)](https://physics.illinois.edu/)]<br>
<br>
[matthew.feickert@cern.ch](mailto:matthew.feickert@cern.ch)

[Snowmass 2021 Computational Frontier Workshop](https://indico.fnal.gov/event/43829/contributions/193820/)

August 10th, 2020

---
# Why is the likelihood important?

.kol-1-2.width-90[
<br>
- High information-density summary of analysis
- Almost everything we do in the analysis ultimately affects the likelihood and is encapsulated in it
   - Trigger
   - Detector
   - Combined Performance / Physics Object Groups
   - Systematic Uncertainties
   - Event Selection
- Unique representation of the analysis to preserve
]
.kol-1-2.width-100[
<br><br>
[![likelihood_connections](figures/likelihood_connections.png)](https://indico.cern.ch/event/839382/contributions/3521168/)
]

---
# Partial likelihoods have been published/preserved

.kol-1-2[
.center.width-95[[![CMS_partial_likelihood](figures/CMS_partial_likelihood.png)](https://cds.cern.ch/record/2242860)]
.center[([CMS, 2017](https://cds.cern.ch/record/2242860))]
]
.kol-1-2[
<br>
<br>
.center.width-100[[![CERN_Analysis_Preservation.png](figures/CERN_Analysis_Preservation.png)](https://home.cern/news/news/knowledge-sharing/new-open-release-allows-theorists-explore-lhc-data-new-way)]
.center[CERN Analysis Preservation implements FAIR data]

.center[([CERN, CHEP 2019](https://indico.cern.ch/event/773049/contributions/3476165/))]
]

---
# Full likelihood serialization...

.center[...making good on [19 year old agreement to publish likelihoods](https://indico.cern.ch/event/746178/contributions/3396797/)]

.center.width-90[
[![likelihood_publishing_agreement](figures/likelihood_publishing_agreement.png)](https://cds.cern.ch/record/411537)
]

.center[([1st Workshop on Confidence Limits, CERN, 2000](http://inspirehep.net/record/534129))]

.bold[This hadn't been done in HEP until 2019]
- In an "open world" of statistics this is a difficult problem to solve
- What to preserve and how? All of ROOT?
- Idea: Focus on a single more tractable binned model first

---
# Enter HistFactory and `pyhf`

$$
f\left(\mathrm{data}\middle|\mathrm{parameters}\right) =  f\left(\vec{n}, \vec{a}\middle|\vec{\eta}, \vec{\chi}\right) = \color{blue}{\prod\_{c \\,\in\\, \textrm{channels}} \prod\_{b \\,\in\\, \textrm{bins}\_c} \textrm{Pois} \left(n\_{cb} \middle| \nu\_{cb}\left(\vec{\eta}, \vec{\chi}\right)\right)} \\,\color{red}{\prod\_{\chi \\,\in\\, \vec{\chi}} c\_{\chi} \left(a\_{\chi}\middle|\chi\right)}
$$

.bold[Use:] Multiple disjoint _channels_ (or regions) of binned distributions with multiple _samples_ contributing to each with additional (possibly shared) systematics between sample estimates

.center[HistFactory is used ubiquitously in binned analyses]
.center[Focus on this flexible p.d.f. template rather than "open world" of models]
.center[.bold[This is a _mathematical_ representation!] Nowhere is any software spec defined]

.bold[`pyhf`: HistFactory in pure Python hardware accelerated with autodiff]
.kol-3-5[
.center.width-100[[![pyhf_PyPI](figures/pyhf_PyPI.png)](https://pypi.org/project/pyhf/)]
]
.kol-2-5[
.grid[
.kol-1-3.center[
.circle.width-80[![Lukas](figures/collaborators/heinrich.jpg)]

.center[[Lukas Heinrich](https://github.com/lukasheinrich)]

CERN
]
.kol-1-3.center[
.circle.width-80[![Matthew](https://avatars2.githubusercontent.com/u/5142394)]

.center[[Matthew Feickert](https://www.matthewfeickert.com/)]

Illinois
]
.kol-1-3.center[
.circle.width-70[![Giordon](figures/collaborators/stark.jpg)]

.center[[Giordon <br>Stark](https://github.com/kratsg)]

UCSC SCIPP
]
]
]

---
# JSON spec fully describes the HistFactory model

.kol-1-4.width-100[
- Human & machine readable .bold[declarative] statistical models
- Industry standard
   - Will be with us forever
- Parsable by every language
   - Highly portable
   - Bidirectional translation <br>with ROOT
- Versionable and easily preserved
   - JSON Schema [describing<br> HistFactory specification](https://scikit-hep.org/pyhf/likelihood.html#bibliography)
   - Attractive for analysis preservation
   - Highly compressible
]
.kol-3-4.center[
.width-105[![demo_JSON](figures/carbon_JSON_spec_annotated.png)]

.center[[`JSON` defining a single channel, two bin counting experiment with systematics](https://scikit-hep.org/pyhf/likelihood.html#toy-example)]
]

---
# ATLAS validation and publication of likelihoods

.kol-1-2[
.center.width-100[[![ATLAS_PUB_Note_title](figures/ATLAS_PUB_Note_title.png)](https://cds.cern.ch/record/2684863)]

.center.width-90[[![overlay_multiplex_contour](figures/overlay_multiplex_contour.png)](https://cds.cern.ch/record/2684863)]

<br>
.center[(ATLAS, 2019)]
]
.kol-1-2[
.center.width-100[[![CERN_news_story](figures/CERN_news_story.png)](https://home.cern/news/news/knowledge-sharing/new-open-release-allows-theorists-explore-lhc-data-new-way)]
.center[(CERN, 2020)]
]

---
# JSON Patch for signal model (reinterpretation)
<!--  -->
.center[JSON Patch gives ability to .bold[easily mutate model]]
.center[Combined with RECAST gives powerful tool for .bold[reinterpretation studies]]
<br>
.center[Think: test a .bold[new theory] with a .bold[new patch]!]
.center[(c.f. [Lukas's RECAST talk](https://indico.fnal.gov/event/43829/contributions/193817/))]
<!--  -->
.kol-1-5[
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>
.center.width-100[![measurement_cartoon](figures/measurement_cartoon.png)]
.center[Signal model A]
]
.kol-3-5[
<!-- Using Perl style in Carbon -->
.center.width-100[![signal_reinterpretation](figures/carbon_reinterpretation.png)]
]
.kol-1-5[
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>
.center.width-100[![reinterpretation_cartoon](figures/reinterpretation_cartoon.png)]
.center[Signal model B]
]

---
# Likelihoods preserved on HEPData

- Background-only model JSON stored
- Hundreds of signal model JSON Patches stored together as a "patch set" file
- Together are able to publish and fully preserve the full likelihood (with own DOI! .width-20[[![DOI](https://img.shields.io/badge/DOI-10.17182%2Fhepdata.90607.v2%2Fr2-blue.svg)](https://doi.org/10.17182/hepdata.90607.v2/r2)] )

.kol-3-5[
[.center.width-100[![HEPData_likelihoods](figures/HEPData_likelihoods.png)]](https://www.hepdata.net/record/ins1755298?version=2)
]
.kol-2-5[
<br>
<br>
.center.width-100[[![carbon_tree_likelihood_archive](figures/carbon_tree_likelihood_archive.png)](https://www.hepdata.net/record/ins1755298?version=2)]
]

---
# ...can be used from HEPData

- Background-only model JSON stored
- Hundreds of signal model JSON Patches stored together as a "patch set" file
<!-- - Together are able to publish and fully preserve the full likelihood (with own DOI! .width-20[[![DOI](https://img.shields.io/badge/DOI-10.17182%2Fhepdata.90607.v2%2Fr2-blue.svg)](https://doi.org/10.17182/hepdata.90607.v2/r2)] ) -->
- Together are able to publish and fully preserve the full likelihood (with own DOI! .width-20[[![DOI](https://img.shields.io/badge/DOI-10.17182%2Fhepdata.90607.v2%2Fr2-blue.svg)](https://doi.org/10.17182/hepdata.90607.v2)] )

.center.width-90[![HEPData_streamed_likelihoods](figures/carbon_patchset_example.png)]

---
# Rapid adoption in ATLAS...
<!--  -->
.kol-1-3[
- Four ATLAS analyses with full likelihoods published to HEPData
- ATLAS SUSY will be continuing to publish full Run 2 likelihoods
]
.kol-2-3[
- direct staus, [doi:10.17182/hepdata.89408](https://doi.org/10.17182/hepdata.89408) (2019)
- sbottom multi-b, [doi:10.17182/hepdata.91127](https://doi.org/10.17182/hepdata.91127) (2019)
- 1Lbb, [doi:10.17182/hepdata.92006](https://doi.org/10.17182/hepdata.92006) (2019)
- 3L eRJR, [doi:10.17182/hepdata.90607.v2](https://doi.org/10.17182/hepdata.90607.v2) (2020)
]
.kol-1-1[
.kol-1-1[
.kol-1-2[
.center.width-70[[![SUSY_EWK_3L_validation](figures/SUSY_RPV_HistFitter.png)](https://indico.cern.ch/event/905793/contributions/3811068/)]
]
.kol-1-2[
.center.width-70[[![SUSY_EWK_3L_validation](figures/SUSY_RPV_pyhf.png)](https://indico.cern.ch/event/905793/contributions/3811068/)]
]
]
.center.smaller[SUSY [EWK 3L RPV](https://atlas.cern/updates/physics-briefing/fantastic-decays-and-where-find-them) analysis ([ATLAS-CONF-2020-009](https://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/PHYSICS/CONFNOTES/ATLAS-CONF-2020-009/)): Exclusion curves as a function of mass and branching fraction to $Z$ bosons]
]

---
# ...and by theory

.kol-2-5[
- `pyhf` likelihoods discussed in the [Les Houches 2019 Physics at TeV Colliders: New Physics Working Group Report](https://inspirehep.net/literature/1782722)
- [SModelS](https://smodels.github.io/) team has implemented a `SModelS`/`pyhf` interface
   - tool for interpreting simplified-model results from the LHC
   - designed to be used by theorists
- Have produced comparison for .italic[Search for direct stau production in events with two hadronic tau leptons in √s = 13 TeV pp collisions with the ATLAS detector] ([ATLAS-SUSY-2018-04](https://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/PHYSICS/PAPERS/SUSY-2018-04/)) [published likelihood](https://www.hepdata.net/record/ins1765529)
   - Compare simplified likelihood (`SModelS`)
   - to full likelihood (`pyhf`)
]
.kol-3-5[
.center.width-100[[![SModels-plot](figures/SModelS_preliminary.png)](https://github.com/scikit-hep/pyhf/issues/620#issuecomment-624638428)]

.italic.smaller[
So here is one of our first reasonable validation plots.
It's preliminary, the black line is ATLAS-SUSY-2018-04 official exclusion curve.
The grey line is SModelS using `pyhf`, running over the published data. &mdash; Wolfgang Waltenberger, CMS/SModelS
]
]

---
# Summary
<!--  -->
- .bold[JSON specification] of `pyhf` likelihoods
   - human/machine readable, versionable, HEPData friendly, orders of magnitude smaller, long term preservation
- .bold[Bidirectional translation] of likelihood specifications
   - ROOT workspaces ↔ `pyhf` JSON
- Publication for the first time of the .bold[full likelihood] of a search for new physics
   - Continued publications from .bold[ATLAS SUSY full Run 2 results]
- .bold[Open publication] on HEPData, reuse and .bold[reinterpretation] with SModelS and RECAST

.kol-1-2.center.width-85[
[![PUB_note_cover](figures/PUB_note_cover.png)](https://cds.cern.ch/record/2684863)
([ATLAS, 2019](https://cds.cern.ch/record/2684863))
]
.kol-1-2.center.width-80[
[![SModelS_preliminary](figures/SModelS_preliminary.png)](https://github.com/scikit-hep/pyhf/issues/620#issuecomment-624638428)
(SModelS of [ATLAS-SUSY-2018-04](https://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/PHYSICS/PAPERS/SUSY-2018-04/))
]

---
class: end-slide, center

.large[Backup]

---
# HistFactory Template

<br>

$$\begin{aligned}
&\mathcal{P}\left(n\_{c}, x\_{e}, a\_{p} \middle|\phi\_{p}, \alpha\_{p}, \gamma\_{b} \right) = \\\\
&{\color{blue}{\prod\_{c \\,\in\\, \textrm{channels}} \left[\textrm{Pois}\left(n\_{c} \middle| \nu\_{c}\right) \prod\_{e=1}^{n\_{c}} f\_{c}\left(x\_{e} \middle| \vec{\alpha}\right)\right]}} {\color{red}{G\left(L\_{0} \middle| \lambda, \Delta\_{L}\right) \prod\_{p\\, \in\\, \mathbb{S}+\Gamma} f\_{p}\left(a\_{p} \middle| \alpha\_{p}\right)}}
\end{aligned}$$

.bold[Use:] Multiple disjoint _channels_ (or regions) of binned distributions with multiple _samples_ contributing to each with additional (possibly shared) systematics between sample estimates

.bold[Main pieces:]

- .blue[Main Poisson p.d.f. for bins observed in all channels]
- .red[Constraint p.d.f. (+ data) for "auxiliary measurements"]
   - encoding systematic uncertainties (normalization, shape, etc)


---
# References

1. ROOT collaboration, K. Cranmer, G. Lewis, L. Moneta, A. Shibata and W. Verkerke, .italic[[HistFactory: A tool for creating statistical models for use with RooFit and RooStats](http://inspirehep.net/record/1236448)], 2012.
2. L. Heinrich, H. Schulz, J. Turner and Y. Zhou, .italic[[Constraining $A_{4}$ Leptonic Flavour Model Parameters at Colliders and Beyond](https://inspirehep.net/record/1698425)], 2018.

---

class: end-slide, center
count: false

The end.

Commit message:

Add pyhf slide to backup

talk.md, after:

class: middle, center, title-slide
count: false

# Likelihood Publication and Preservation

<br>

.huge.blue[Matthew Feickert]<br>
.huge[(University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign)]
.center.width-30[[![illinois_logo](assets/logos/logo_institution.png)](https://physics.illinois.edu/)]<br>
<br>
[matthew.feickert@cern.ch](mailto:matthew.feickert@cern.ch)

[Snowmass 2021 Computational Frontier Workshop](https://indico.fnal.gov/event/43829/contributions/193820/)

August 10th, 2020

---
# Why is the likelihood important?

.kol-1-2.width-90[
<br>
- High information-density summary of analysis
- Almost everything we do in the analysis ultimately affects the likelihood and is encapsulated in it
   - Trigger
   - Detector
   - Combined Performance / Physics Object Groups
   - Systematic Uncertainties
   - Event Selection
- Unique representation of the analysis to preserve
]
.kol-1-2.width-100[
<br><br>
[![likelihood_connections](figures/likelihood_connections.png)](https://indico.cern.ch/event/839382/contributions/3521168/)
]

---
# Partial likelihoods have been published/preserved

.kol-1-2[
.center.width-95[[![CMS_partial_likelihood](figures/CMS_partial_likelihood.png)](https://cds.cern.ch/record/2242860)]
.center[([CMS, 2017](https://cds.cern.ch/record/2242860))]
]
.kol-1-2[
<br>
<br>
.center.width-100[[![CERN_Analysis_Preservation.png](figures/CERN_Analysis_Preservation.png)](https://home.cern/news/news/knowledge-sharing/new-open-release-allows-theorists-explore-lhc-data-new-way)]
.center[CERN Analysis Preservation implements FAIR data]

.center[([CERN, CHEP 2019](https://indico.cern.ch/event/773049/contributions/3476165/))]
]

---
# Full likelihood serialization...

.center[...making good on [19 year old agreement to publish likelihoods](https://indico.cern.ch/event/746178/contributions/3396797/)]

.center.width-90[
[![likelihood_publishing_agreement](figures/likelihood_publishing_agreement.png)](https://cds.cern.ch/record/411537)
]

.center[([1st Workshop on Confidence Limits, CERN, 2000](http://inspirehep.net/record/534129))]

.bold[This hadn't been done in HEP until 2019]
- In an "open world" of statistics this is a difficult problem to solve
- What to preserve and how? All of ROOT?
- Idea: Focus on a single more tractable binned model first

---
# Enter HistFactory and `pyhf`

$$
f\left(\mathrm{data}\middle|\mathrm{parameters}\right) =  f\left(\vec{n}, \vec{a}\middle|\vec{\eta}, \vec{\chi}\right) = \color{blue}{\prod\_{c \\,\in\\, \textrm{channels}} \prod\_{b \\,\in\\, \textrm{bins}\_c} \textrm{Pois} \left(n\_{cb} \middle| \nu\_{cb}\left(\vec{\eta}, \vec{\chi}\right)\right)} \\,\color{red}{\prod\_{\chi \\,\in\\, \vec{\chi}} c\_{\chi} \left(a\_{\chi}\middle|\chi\right)}
$$

.bold[Use:] Multiple disjoint _channels_ (or regions) of binned distributions with multiple _samples_ contributing to each with additional (possibly shared) systematics between sample estimates

.center[HistFactory is used ubiquitously in binned analyses]
.center[Focus on this flexible p.d.f. template rather than "open world" of models]
.center[.bold[This is a _mathematical_ representation!] Nowhere is any software spec defined]

.bold[`pyhf`: HistFactory in pure Python hardware accelerated with autodiff]
.kol-3-5[
.center.width-100[[![pyhf_PyPI](figures/pyhf_PyPI.png)](https://pypi.org/project/pyhf/)]
]
.kol-2-5[
.grid[
.kol-1-3.center[
.circle.width-80[![Lukas](figures/collaborators/heinrich.jpg)]

.center[[Lukas Heinrich](https://github.com/lukasheinrich)]

CERN
]
.kol-1-3.center[
.circle.width-80[![Matthew](https://avatars2.githubusercontent.com/u/5142394)]

.center[[Matthew Feickert](https://www.matthewfeickert.com/)]

Illinois
]
.kol-1-3.center[
.circle.width-70[![Giordon](figures/collaborators/stark.jpg)]

.center[[Giordon <br>Stark](https://github.com/kratsg)]

UCSC SCIPP
]
]
]

---
# JSON spec fully describes the HistFactory model

.kol-1-4.width-100[
- Human & machine readable .bold[declarative] statistical models
- Industry standard
   - Will be with us forever
- Parsable by every language
   - Highly portable
   - Bidirectional translation <br>with ROOT
- Versionable and easily preserved
   - JSON Schema [describing<br> HistFactory specification](https://scikit-hep.org/pyhf/likelihood.html#bibliography)
   - Attractive for analysis preservation
   - Highly compressible
]
.kol-3-4.center[
.width-105[![demo_JSON](figures/carbon_JSON_spec_annotated.png)]

.center[[`JSON` defining a single channel, two bin counting experiment with systematics](https://scikit-hep.org/pyhf/likelihood.html#toy-example)]
]

---
# ATLAS validation and publication of likelihoods

.kol-1-2[
.center.width-100[[![ATLAS_PUB_Note_title](figures/ATLAS_PUB_Note_title.png)](https://cds.cern.ch/record/2684863)]

.center.width-90[[![overlay_multiplex_contour](figures/overlay_multiplex_contour.png)](https://cds.cern.ch/record/2684863)]

<br>
.center[(ATLAS, 2019)]
]
.kol-1-2[
.center.width-100[[![CERN_news_story](figures/CERN_news_story.png)](https://home.cern/news/news/knowledge-sharing/new-open-release-allows-theorists-explore-lhc-data-new-way)]
.center[(CERN, 2020)]
]

---
# JSON Patch for signal model (reinterpretation)
<!--  -->
.center[JSON Patch gives ability to .bold[easily mutate model]]
.center[Combined with RECAST gives powerful tool for .bold[reinterpretation studies]]
<br>
.center[Think: test a .bold[new theory] with a .bold[new patch]!]
.center[(c.f. [Lukas's RECAST talk](https://indico.fnal.gov/event/43829/contributions/193817/))]
<!--  -->
.kol-1-5[
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>
.center.width-100[![measurement_cartoon](figures/measurement_cartoon.png)]
.center[Signal model A]
]
.kol-3-5[
<!-- Using Perl style in Carbon -->
.center.width-100[![signal_reinterpretation](figures/carbon_reinterpretation.png)]
]
.kol-1-5[
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>
.center.width-100[![reinterpretation_cartoon](figures/reinterpretation_cartoon.png)]
.center[Signal model B]
]

---
# Likelihoods preserved on HEPData

- Background-only model JSON stored
- Hundreds of signal model JSON Patches stored together as a "patch set" file
- Together are able to publish and fully preserve the full likelihood (with own DOI! .width-20[[![DOI](https://img.shields.io/badge/DOI-10.17182%2Fhepdata.90607.v2%2Fr2-blue.svg)](https://doi.org/10.17182/hepdata.90607.v2/r2)] )

.kol-3-5[
[.center.width-100[![HEPData_likelihoods](figures/HEPData_likelihoods.png)]](https://www.hepdata.net/record/ins1755298?version=2)
]
.kol-2-5[
<br>
<br>
.center.width-100[[![carbon_tree_likelihood_archive](figures/carbon_tree_likelihood_archive.png)](https://www.hepdata.net/record/ins1755298?version=2)]
]

---
# ...can be used from HEPData

- Background-only model JSON stored
- Hundreds of signal model JSON Patches stored together as a "patch set" file
<!-- - Together are able to publish and fully preserve the full likelihood (with own DOI! .width-20[[![DOI](https://img.shields.io/badge/DOI-10.17182%2Fhepdata.90607.v2%2Fr2-blue.svg)](https://doi.org/10.17182/hepdata.90607.v2/r2)] ) -->
- Together are able to publish and fully preserve the full likelihood (with own DOI! .width-20[[![DOI](https://img.shields.io/badge/DOI-10.17182%2Fhepdata.90607.v2%2Fr2-blue.svg)](https://doi.org/10.17182/hepdata.90607.v2)] )

.center.width-90[![HEPData_streamed_likelihoods](figures/carbon_patchset_example.png)]

---
# Rapid adoption in ATLAS...
<!--  -->
.kol-1-3[
- Four ATLAS analyses with full likelihoods published to HEPData
- ATLAS SUSY will be continuing to publish full Run 2 likelihoods
]
.kol-2-3[
- direct staus, [doi:10.17182/hepdata.89408](https://doi.org/10.17182/hepdata.89408) (2019)
- sbottom multi-b, [doi:10.17182/hepdata.91127](https://doi.org/10.17182/hepdata.91127) (2019)
- 1Lbb, [doi:10.17182/hepdata.92006](https://doi.org/10.17182/hepdata.92006) (2019)
- 3L eRJR, [doi:10.17182/hepdata.90607.v2](https://doi.org/10.17182/hepdata.90607.v2) (2020)
]
.kol-1-1[
.kol-1-1[
.kol-1-2[
.center.width-70[[![SUSY_EWK_3L_validation](figures/SUSY_RPV_HistFitter.png)](https://indico.cern.ch/event/905793/contributions/3811068/)]
]
.kol-1-2[
.center.width-70[[![SUSY_EWK_3L_validation](figures/SUSY_RPV_pyhf.png)](https://indico.cern.ch/event/905793/contributions/3811068/)]
]
]
.center.smaller[SUSY [EWK 3L RPV](https://atlas.cern/updates/physics-briefing/fantastic-decays-and-where-find-them) analysis ([ATLAS-CONF-2020-009](https://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/PHYSICS/CONFNOTES/ATLAS-CONF-2020-009/)): Exclusion curves as a function of mass and branching fraction to $Z$ bosons]
]

---
# ...and by theory

.kol-2-5[
- `pyhf` likelihoods discussed in the [Les Houches 2019 Physics at TeV Colliders: New Physics Working Group Report](https://inspirehep.net/literature/1782722)
- [SModelS](https://smodels.github.io/) team has implemented a `SModelS`/`pyhf` interface
   - tool for interpreting simplified-model results from the LHC
   - designed to be used by theorists
- Have produced comparison for .italic[Search for direct stau production in events with two hadronic tau leptons in √s = 13 TeV pp collisions with the ATLAS detector] ([ATLAS-SUSY-2018-04](https://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/PHYSICS/PAPERS/SUSY-2018-04/)) [published likelihood](https://www.hepdata.net/record/ins1765529)
   - Compare simplified likelihood (`SModelS`)
   - to full likelihood (`pyhf`)
]
.kol-3-5[
.center.width-100[[![SModels-plot](figures/SModelS_preliminary.png)](https://github.com/scikit-hep/pyhf/issues/620#issuecomment-624638428)]

.italic.smaller[
So here is one of our first reasonable validation plots.
It's preliminary, the black line is ATLAS-SUSY-2018-04 official exclusion curve.
The grey line is SModelS using `pyhf`, running over the published data. &mdash; Wolfgang Waltenberger, CMS/SModelS
]
]

---
# Summary
<!--  -->
- .bold[JSON specification] of `pyhf` likelihoods
   - human/machine readable, versionable, HEPData friendly, orders of magnitude smaller, long term preservation
- .bold[Bidirectional translation] of likelihood specifications
   - ROOT workspaces ↔ `pyhf` JSON
- Publication for the first time of the .bold[full likelihood] of a search for new physics
   - Continued publications from .bold[ATLAS SUSY full Run 2 results]
- .bold[Open publication] on HEPData, reuse and .bold[reinterpretation] with SModelS and RECAST

.kol-1-2.center.width-85[
[![PUB_note_cover](figures/PUB_note_cover.png)](https://cds.cern.ch/record/2684863)
([ATLAS, 2019](https://cds.cern.ch/record/2684863))
]
.kol-1-2.center.width-80[
[![SModelS_preliminary](figures/SModelS_preliminary.png)](https://github.com/scikit-hep/pyhf/issues/620#issuecomment-624638428)
(SModelS of [ATLAS-SUSY-2018-04](https://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/PHYSICS/PAPERS/SUSY-2018-04/))
]

---
class: end-slide, center

.large[Backup]

---
# HistFactory Template

<br>

$$\begin{aligned}
&\mathcal{P}\left(n\_{c}, x\_{e}, a\_{p} \middle|\phi\_{p}, \alpha\_{p}, \gamma\_{b} \right) = \\\\
&{\color{blue}{\prod\_{c \\,\in\\, \textrm{channels}} \left[\textrm{Pois}\left(n\_{c} \middle| \nu\_{c}\right) \prod\_{e=1}^{n\_{c}} f\_{c}\left(x\_{e} \middle| \vec{\alpha}\right)\right]}} {\color{red}{G\left(L\_{0} \middle| \lambda, \Delta\_{L}\right) \prod\_{p\\, \in\\, \mathbb{S}+\Gamma} f\_{p}\left(a\_{p} \middle| \alpha\_{p}\right)}}
\end{aligned}$$

.bold[Use:] Multiple disjoint _channels_ (or regions) of binned distributions with multiple _samples_ contributing to each with additional (possibly shared) systematics between sample estimates

.bold[Main pieces:]

- .blue[Main Poisson p.d.f. for bins observed in all channels]
- .red[Constraint p.d.f. (+ data) for "auxiliary measurements"]
   - encoding systematic uncertainties (normalization, shape, etc)

---
# What is `pyhf`?

Please checkout the many resources we have starting with the [website](https://scikit-hep.org/pyhf/) and the [SciPy 2020 talk](https://youtu.be/FrH9s3eB6fU)!

<!-- [![SciPy 2020 talk YouTube](http://i3.ytimg.com/vi/FrH9s3eB6fU/maxresdefault.jpg)](https://youtu.be/FrH9s3eB6fU) -->
<p align="center">
<a href="https://youtu.be/FrH9s3eB6fU"><img src="http://i3.ytimg.com/vi/FrH9s3eB6fU/maxresdefault.jpg" width="480" height="270"></a>
</p>
.grid[
.kol-1-3.center[
.width-60[[![scikit-hep_logo](https://scikit-hep.org/assets/images/logo.png)](https://scikit-hep.org/)]
]
.kol-1-3.center[
<br>
.width-60[[![pyhf_logo](https://iris-hep.org/assets/logos/pyhf-logo.png)](https://github.com/scikit-hep/pyhf)]
]
.kol-1-3.center[
<br>
.width-70[[![iris-hep_logo](assets/logos/logo_IRIS-HEP.png)](https://iris-hep.org/)]
]
]

---
# References

1. ROOT collaboration, K. Cranmer, G. Lewis, L. Moneta, A. Shibata and W. Verkerke, .italic[[HistFactory: A tool for creating statistical models for use with RooFit and RooStats](http://inspirehep.net/record/1236448)], 2012.
2. L. Heinrich, H. Schulz, J. Turner and Y. Zhou, .italic[[Constraining $A_{4}$ Leptonic Flavour Model Parameters at Colliders and Beyond](https://inspirehep.net/record/1698425)], 2018.

---

class: end-slide, center
count: false

The end.
